README.md, before:

# MT4 Observer + Learner

This project provides a skeleton framework for creating an "Observer" Expert Advisor (EA) that monitors other bots trading in the same MetaTrader 4 account.  It logs trade activity, exports data for learning and can generate candidate strategy EAs based on that information.

The EA records trade openings and closings using the `OnTradeTransaction` callback when available. Platforms without this callback fall back to scanning orders each tick so logs remain accurate.

## Directory Layout

- `experts/` – MQL4 source files.
  - `Observer_TBot.mq4` – main observer EA.
  - `StrategyTemplate.mq4` – template used for generated strategies.
    Trade volume is automatically scaled between `MinLots` and `MaxLots`
    based on the model probability. Stop management can move the
    stop loss to break-even after `BreakEvenPips` profit and optionally
    trail by `TrailingPips`.
  - `model_interface.mqh` – shared structures.
- `scripts/` – helper Python scripts.
  - `train_target_clone.py` – trains a model from exported logs.
  - `generate_mql4_from_model.py` – renders a new EA from a trained model description.
  - `evaluate_predictions.py` – basic log evaluation utility.
  - `promote_best_models.py` – selects top models by metric and copies them to a best directory.
  - `plot_metrics.py` – plot metric history using Matplotlib.
  - `plot_feature_importance.py` – display SHAP feature importances saved in `model.json`.
- `models/` – location for generated models.
- `config.json` – example configuration file.

## Installation

1. Install MetaTrader 4 on a Windows machine or VPS.
2. Copy the contents of `experts/` to your terminal's `MQL4\Experts` folder.
3. Copy the `scripts/` directory somewhere accessible with Python 3 installed.
4. Restart the MT4 terminal and compile `Observer_TBot.mq4` using MetaEditor.
5. Attach `Observer_TBot` to a single chart and adjust the extern inputs as needed
   (magic numbers to observe, log directory, lot bounds, etc.).

## External Training

Exported logs can be processed by the Python scripts.  A typical workflow is:

```bash
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model.json experts
```

The training step saves mean absolute SHAP values for each feature under
`feature_importance` in `model.json`. Visualise these importances with:

```bash
python plot_feature_importance.py models/model.json
```

Multiple models can be supplied to build a simple ensemble. Feature names are
merged and the generated EA averages the probabilities from each model:

```bash
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model_a.json models/model_b.json experts
```

Pass `--model-type catboost` to train a CatBoost model when the `catboost`
package is installed.

Pass ``--regress-sl-tp`` to also fit linear models predicting stop loss and take
profit distances. The coefficients are saved in ``model.json`` and generated
strategies will automatically place orders with these predicted values.

Hyperparameters can be optimised automatically when `optuna` is installed. The
best trial's parameters and validation score are saved to `model.json`:

```bash
pip install optuna
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models --optuna-trials 50
```

Optuna explores learning rate, tree depth or regularisation strength depending
on the chosen model type.

For ongoing training simply rerun the script with the ``--incremental`` flag and
the latest log directory. The generated MQ4 file name will include the training
timestamp so previous versions remain intact:

```bash
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models --incremental
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model.json experts
```

Pass ``--cache-features`` to reuse the previously extracted feature matrix when
running incrementally. This avoids reprocessing large log files as long as the
configured features match the cached ``feature_names``.

When ``--incremental`` is used with the default ``logreg`` model, training
updates the existing classifier in place by calling ``partial_fit`` on batches
of new samples. The class vector ``[0, 1]`` is stored in ``model.json`` so
subsequent runs can keep learning from where the last run left off.

Compile the generated MQ4 file and the observer will begin evaluating predictions from that model.

## Model Reloading

Strategies built from ``StrategyTemplate.mq4`` can reload their parameters
without recompilation. After new training completes run:

```bash
python scripts/publish_model.py models/model.json /path/to/MT4/MQL4/Files
```

Set the ``ReloadModelInterval`` input on the EA to the desired number of
seconds. When the file ``model.json`` in the terminal's ``Files`` directory is
updated the strategy will automatically load the new coefficients and continue
trading with minimal downtime.

## Automated Promotion

The ``promote_best_models.py`` helper can be scheduled to run periodically,
copying the highest-scoring models to ``models/best`` and publishing the top
one to the terminal's ``Files`` directory. An example cron entry running every
30 minutes:

```cron
*/30 * * * * /path/to/BotCopier/scripts/promote_and_publish.sh
```

Set ``ReloadModelInterval`` on the EA so it automatically reloads the published
model when ``model.json`` changes.

## Automatic Retraining

The ``auto_retrain.py`` helper watches the most recent entries in
``metrics.csv`` and triggers a new training run when the rolling win rate or
Sharpe ratio drops below configurable thresholds. After training completes the
updated model is published to the terminal's ``Files`` directory.

An example cron job running every 15 minutes:

```cron
*/15 * * * * /path/to/BotCopier/scripts/auto_retrain.py --log-dir /path/to/observer_logs --out-dir /path/to/BotCopier/models --files-dir /path/to/MT4/MQL4/Files --win-rate-threshold 0.4 --sharpe-threshold 0.0
```

## Metrics Tracking

During operation the EA records a summary line for each tracked model in
`observer_logs/metrics.csv`. Each entry contains the time of capture, the model
identifier (its magic number), the rolling win rate, average profit, trade
count, drawdown and Sharpe ratio calculated over the last
`MetricsRollingDays` days. Old entries beyond `MetricsDaysToKeep` days are
pruned automatically.
The ``plot_metrics.py`` script can be used to visualise these values.

## Maintenance

Logs are written to the directory specified by the EA parameter `LogDirectoryName` (default `observer_logs`).  Periodically archive or clean this directory to avoid large disk usage.  Models placed in the `models/best` folder can be retained for future analysis.
Trade events are stored in a small in-memory buffer before being flushed to `trades_raw.csv` on each timer tick or when the buffer reaches `LogBufferSize` lines.  Set `EnableDebugLogging` to `true` to enable verbose output and force immediate writes for easier debugging.
Metrics entries older than the number of days specified by `MetricsDaysToKeep` (default 30) are removed automatically during log export.

## Real-time Streaming

When `EnableSocketLogging` is enabled the observer EA emits each trade event and
periodic metric summary as newline separated JSON over a TCP socket. Run the
``socket_log_service.py`` helper to capture these messages into a CSV file. The
service now uses ``asyncio`` to handle multiple connections concurrently:

```bash
python scripts/socket_log_service.py --out stream.csv
```

For persistent storage you can instead log directly to a SQLite database using ``sqlite_log_service.py``:

```bash
python scripts/sqlite_log_service.py --db stream.db
```

Query the logs later with the ``sqlite3`` command line tool, for example:

```bash
sqlite3 stream.db "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM logs;"
```

Start ``Observer_TBot`` with the same host and port settings and the CSV will be
populated as trades occur.  If the connection is lost, the EA automatically
attempts to reconnect so streaming can resume without manual intervention.

To forward metric snapshots without creating ``metrics.csv`` set ``StreamMetricsOnly``
to ``true``. Use the ``metrics_collector.py`` helper to store these messages
in a SQLite database:

```bash
python scripts/metrics_collector.py --db metrics.db --http-port 8080
```

The collector exposes an HTTP endpoint returning the most recent metrics as JSON:

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/metrics?limit=10
```

To capture newline-delimited JSON from the EA directly, run the
``stream_listener.py`` helper which writes trade events to
``logs/trades_raw.csv`` and metrics to ``logs/metrics.csv``. Each message must
include a matching ``schema_version`` field (default ``1.0`` or overridden via
the ``SCHEMA_VERSION`` environment variable).

After each trading session ``upload_logs.py`` can commit these CSV files and
push them back to the repository. The script uses the ``GITHUB_TOKEN``
environment variable for authentication.

### Environment Variables

* ``SCHEMA_VERSION`` – expected message schema version for ``stream_listener.py``.
* ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` – personal access token with ``repo`` scope used by
  ``upload_logs.py`` to push commits.

### Cron Job Example

```cron
0 0 * * * cd /path/to/BotCopier && GITHUB_TOKEN=XXXX python scripts/upload_logs.py
```

## Tick History Export

Historical tick data can be exported for all symbols that appear in the account
history using the ``TickHistoryExporter`` script.  Copy
``experts/TickHistoryExporter.mq4`` to your ``MQL4\Scripts`` directory and run
it from the terminal.  CSV files named ``ticks_SYMBOL.csv`` will be written to
the ``Files`` folder inside ``OutDir`` for the period spanning your trading
activity.  The helper script ``analyze_ticks.py`` can then compute basic
statistics from these files:

```bash
python scripts/analyze_ticks.py observer_logs/ticks_EURUSD.csv
```

## Strategy Backtesting

Evaluate a generated strategy against historical tick data using
``scripts/backtest_strategy.py``. The script extracts the ``MagicNumber`` and
threshold from the MQ4 file, simulates trades on the tick series and writes a
JSON report containing win rate, profit factor, drawdown and Sharpe ratio. When
``--metrics-file`` is supplied the results are also appended to a
``metrics.csv`` file for comparison with live trading:

```bash
python scripts/backtest_strategy.py experts/MyStrategy.mq4 \
    observer_logs/ticks_EURUSD.csv --report backtest.json \
    --metrics-file metrics.csv
```


## Running Tests

Install the Python requirements and run `pytest` from the repository root. At a
minimum `numpy`, `scikit-learn` and `pytest` are needed.  The `xgboost`,
`lightgbm` and `catboost` packages are optional if you want to train XGBoost,
LightGBM or CatBoost models.
`stable-baselines3` can be
installed to experiment with PPO, DQN, A2C or DDPG agents. Continuous-action
methods like DDPG require an environment using a `Box` action space – the
included discrete environment must be adapted for such algorithms:

```bash
pip install numpy scikit-learn pytest xgboost lightgbm catboost stable-baselines3 shap
pytest
```

## Feature Importance Visualization

Training stores SHAP-based feature importances in `model.json`. Create a bar chart with Matplotlib:

```python
import json
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

with open("models/model.json") as f:
    data = json.load(f)

fi = data.get("feature_importance", {})
plt.bar(range(len(fi)), list(fi.values()), tick_label=list(fi.keys()))
plt.xticks(rotation=45, ha="right")
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Troubleshooting

- Ensure the MT4 terminal has permission to write files in `MQL4\Files`.
- When running Python scripts, verify the paths to log files and models are correct.
- Use the Experts and Journal tabs inside MT4 for additional debugging information.

## Debugging Tips

- Set `EnableDebugLogging` to `true` to print socket status and feature values.
- Review the Experts and Journal tabs in MT4 to see these messages.

This repository contains only minimal placeholder code to get started.  Extend the MQL4 and Python modules to implement full learning and cloning functionality.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Add RL fine-tuning script

README.md, after:

# MT4 Observer + Learner

This project provides a skeleton framework for creating an "Observer" Expert Advisor (EA) that monitors other bots trading in the same MetaTrader 4 account.  It logs trade activity, exports data for learning and can generate candidate strategy EAs based on that information.

The EA records trade openings and closings using the `OnTradeTransaction` callback when available. Platforms without this callback fall back to scanning orders each tick so logs remain accurate.

## Directory Layout

- `experts/` – MQL4 source files.
  - `Observer_TBot.mq4` – main observer EA.
  - `StrategyTemplate.mq4` – template used for generated strategies.
    Trade volume is automatically scaled between `MinLots` and `MaxLots`
    based on the model probability. Stop management can move the
    stop loss to break-even after `BreakEvenPips` profit and optionally
    trail by `TrailingPips`.
  - `model_interface.mqh` – shared structures.
- `scripts/` – helper Python scripts.
  - `train_target_clone.py` – trains a model from exported logs.
  - `generate_mql4_from_model.py` – renders a new EA from a trained model description.
  - `evaluate_predictions.py` – basic log evaluation utility.
  - `promote_best_models.py` – selects top models by metric and copies them to a best directory.
  - `plot_metrics.py` – plot metric history using Matplotlib.
  - `plot_feature_importance.py` – display SHAP feature importances saved in `model.json`.
- `models/` – location for generated models.
- `config.json` – example configuration file.

## Installation

1. Install MetaTrader 4 on a Windows machine or VPS.
2. Copy the contents of `experts/` to your terminal's `MQL4\Experts` folder.
3. Copy the `scripts/` directory somewhere accessible with Python 3 installed.
4. Restart the MT4 terminal and compile `Observer_TBot.mq4` using MetaEditor.
5. Attach `Observer_TBot` to a single chart and adjust the extern inputs as needed
   (magic numbers to observe, log directory, lot bounds, etc.).

## External Training

Exported logs can be processed by the Python scripts.  A typical workflow is:

```bash
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model.json experts
```

The training step saves mean absolute SHAP values for each feature under
`feature_importance` in `model.json`. Visualise these importances with:

```bash
python plot_feature_importance.py models/model.json
```

Multiple models can be supplied to build a simple ensemble. Feature names are
merged and the generated EA averages the probabilities from each model:

```bash
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model_a.json models/model_b.json experts
```

Pass `--model-type catboost` to train a CatBoost model when the `catboost`
package is installed.

Pass ``--regress-sl-tp`` to also fit linear models predicting stop loss and take
profit distances. The coefficients are saved in ``model.json`` and generated
strategies will automatically place orders with these predicted values.

Hyperparameters can be optimised automatically when `optuna` is installed. The
best trial's parameters and validation score are saved to `model.json`:

```bash
pip install optuna
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models --optuna-trials 50
```

Optuna explores learning rate, tree depth or regularisation strength depending
on the chosen model type.

For ongoing training simply rerun the script with the ``--incremental`` flag and
the latest log directory. The generated MQ4 file name will include the training
timestamp so previous versions remain intact:

```bash
python train_target_clone.py --data-dir "C:\\path\\to\\observer_logs" --out-dir models --incremental
python generate_mql4_from_model.py models/model.json experts
```

Pass ``--cache-features`` to reuse the previously extracted feature matrix when
running incrementally. This avoids reprocessing large log files as long as the
configured features match the cached ``feature_names``.

When ``--incremental`` is used with the default ``logreg`` model, training
updates the existing classifier in place by calling ``partial_fit`` on batches
of new samples. The class vector ``[0, 1]`` is stored in ``model.json`` so
subsequent runs can keep learning from where the last run left off.

Compile the generated MQ4 file and the observer will begin evaluating predictions from that model.

## Reinforcement Learning Fine-Tuning

Supervised models can be further tuned with reinforcement learning. The
``train_rl_agent.py`` helper loads an existing ``model.json`` and fine-tunes it
against historical trade logs using a DQN or PPO agent from
``stable-baselines3`` when available.

```bash
pip install stable-baselines3 pandas
python scripts/train_rl_agent.py --data-dir logs --out-dir models --start-model models/model.json --algo ppo --training-steps 1000
```

The script writes an updated ``model.json`` containing the RL-enhanced weights
along with ``training_steps`` and ``avg_reward`` metadata.

## Model Reloading

Strategies built from ``StrategyTemplate.mq4`` can reload their parameters
without recompilation. After new training completes run:

```bash
python scripts/publish_model.py models/model.json /path/to/MT4/MQL4/Files
```

Set the ``ReloadModelInterval`` input on the EA to the desired number of
seconds. When the file ``model.json`` in the terminal's ``Files`` directory is
updated the strategy will automatically load the new coefficients and continue
trading with minimal downtime.

## Automated Promotion

The ``promote_best_models.py`` helper can be scheduled to run periodically,
copying the highest-scoring models to ``models/best`` and publishing the top
one to the terminal's ``Files`` directory. An example cron entry running every
30 minutes:

```cron
*/30 * * * * /path/to/BotCopier/scripts/promote_and_publish.sh
```

Set ``ReloadModelInterval`` on the EA so it automatically reloads the published
model when ``model.json`` changes.

## Automatic Retraining

The ``auto_retrain.py`` helper watches the most recent entries in
``metrics.csv`` and triggers a new training run when the rolling win rate or
Sharpe ratio drops below configurable thresholds. After training completes the
updated model is published to the terminal's ``Files`` directory.

An example cron job running every 15 minutes:

```cron
*/15 * * * * /path/to/BotCopier/scripts/auto_retrain.py --log-dir /path/to/observer_logs --out-dir /path/to/BotCopier/models --files-dir /path/to/MT4/MQL4/Files --win-rate-threshold 0.4 --sharpe-threshold 0.0
```

## Metrics Tracking

During operation the EA records a summary line for each tracked model in
`observer_logs/metrics.csv`. Each entry contains the time of capture, the model
identifier (its magic number), the rolling win rate, average profit, trade
count, drawdown and Sharpe ratio calculated over the last
`MetricsRollingDays` days. Old entries beyond `MetricsDaysToKeep` days are
pruned automatically.
The ``plot_metrics.py`` script can be used to visualise these values.

## Maintenance

Logs are written to the directory specified by the EA parameter `LogDirectoryName` (default `observer_logs`).  Periodically archive or clean this directory to avoid large disk usage.  Models placed in the `models/best` folder can be retained for future analysis.
Trade events are stored in a small in-memory buffer before being flushed to `trades_raw.csv` on each timer tick or when the buffer reaches `LogBufferSize` lines.  Set `EnableDebugLogging` to `true` to enable verbose output and force immediate writes for easier debugging.
Metrics entries older than the number of days specified by `MetricsDaysToKeep` (default 30) are removed automatically during log export.

## Real-time Streaming

When `EnableSocketLogging` is enabled the observer EA emits each trade event and
periodic metric summary as newline separated JSON over a TCP socket. Run the
``socket_log_service.py`` helper to capture these messages into a CSV file. The
service now uses ``asyncio`` to handle multiple connections concurrently:

```bash
python scripts/socket_log_service.py --out stream.csv
```

For persistent storage you can instead log directly to a SQLite database using ``sqlite_log_service.py``:

```bash
python scripts/sqlite_log_service.py --db stream.db
```

Query the logs later with the ``sqlite3`` command line tool, for example:

```bash
sqlite3 stream.db "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM logs;"
```

Start ``Observer_TBot`` with the same host and port settings and the CSV will be
populated as trades occur.  If the connection is lost, the EA automatically
attempts to reconnect so streaming can resume without manual intervention.

To forward metric snapshots without creating ``metrics.csv`` set ``StreamMetricsOnly``
to ``true``. Use the ``metrics_collector.py`` helper to store these messages
in a SQLite database:

```bash
python scripts/metrics_collector.py --db metrics.db --http-port 8080
```

The collector exposes an HTTP endpoint returning the most recent metrics as JSON:

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/metrics?limit=10
```

To capture newline-delimited JSON from the EA directly, run the
``stream_listener.py`` helper which writes trade events to
``logs/trades_raw.csv`` and metrics to ``logs/metrics.csv``. Each message must
include a matching ``schema_version`` field (default ``1.0`` or overridden via
the ``SCHEMA_VERSION`` environment variable).

After each trading session ``upload_logs.py`` can commit these CSV files and
push them back to the repository. The script uses the ``GITHUB_TOKEN``
environment variable for authentication.

### Environment Variables

* ``SCHEMA_VERSION`` – expected message schema version for ``stream_listener.py``.
* ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` – personal access token with ``repo`` scope used by
  ``upload_logs.py`` to push commits.

### Cron Job Example

```cron
0 0 * * * cd /path/to/BotCopier && GITHUB_TOKEN=XXXX python scripts/upload_logs.py
```

## Tick History Export

Historical tick data can be exported for all symbols that appear in the account
history using the ``TickHistoryExporter`` script.  Copy
``experts/TickHistoryExporter.mq4`` to your ``MQL4\Scripts`` directory and run
it from the terminal.  CSV files named ``ticks_SYMBOL.csv`` will be written to
the ``Files`` folder inside ``OutDir`` for the period spanning your trading
activity.  The helper script ``analyze_ticks.py`` can then compute basic
statistics from these files:

```bash
python scripts/analyze_ticks.py observer_logs/ticks_EURUSD.csv
```

## Strategy Backtesting

Evaluate a generated strategy against historical tick data using
``scripts/backtest_strategy.py``. The script extracts the ``MagicNumber`` and
threshold from the MQ4 file, simulates trades on the tick series and writes a
JSON report containing win rate, profit factor, drawdown and Sharpe ratio. When
``--metrics-file`` is supplied the results are also appended to a
``metrics.csv`` file for comparison with live trading:

```bash
python scripts/backtest_strategy.py experts/MyStrategy.mq4 \
    observer_logs/ticks_EURUSD.csv --report backtest.json \
    --metrics-file metrics.csv
```


## Running Tests

Install the Python requirements and run `pytest` from the repository root. At a
minimum `numpy`, `scikit-learn` and `pytest` are needed.  The `xgboost`,
`lightgbm` and `catboost` packages are optional if you want to train XGBoost,
LightGBM or CatBoost models.
`stable-baselines3` can be
installed to experiment with PPO, DQN, A2C or DDPG agents. Continuous-action
methods like DDPG require an environment using a `Box` action space – the
included discrete environment must be adapted for such algorithms:

```bash
pip install numpy scikit-learn pytest xgboost lightgbm catboost stable-baselines3 shap
pytest
```

## Feature Importance Visualization

Training stores SHAP-based feature importances in `model.json`. Create a bar chart with Matplotlib:

```python
import json
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

with open("models/model.json") as f:
    data = json.load(f)

fi = data.get("feature_importance", {})
plt.bar(range(len(fi)), list(fi.values()), tick_label=list(fi.keys()))
plt.xticks(rotation=45, ha="right")
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Troubleshooting

- Ensure the MT4 terminal has permission to write files in `MQL4\Files`.
- When running Python scripts, verify the paths to log files and models are correct.
- Use the Experts and Journal tabs inside MT4 for additional debugging information.

## Debugging Tips

- Set `EnableDebugLogging` to `true` to print socket status and feature values.
- Review the Experts and Journal tabs in MT4 to see these messages.

This repository contains only minimal placeholder code to get started.  Extend the MQL4 and Python modules to implement full learning and cloning functionality.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
